the cat felis catus is a domestic species of small carnivorous mammal. is the only domesticated species in the family felidae and is often referred to as the domestic cat to distinguish it from the wild members of the family. a cat can either be a house cat a farm cat or a feral cat the latter ranges freely and avoids human contact.domestic cats are valued by humans for companionship and their ability to hunt rodents. about  cat breeds are recognized by various cat registries.
the cat is similar in anatomy to the other felid species it has a strong flexible body quick reflexes sharp teeth and retractable claws adapted to killing small prey. its night vision and sense of smell are well developed. 
cat communication includes vocalizations like meowing purring trilling hissing growling and grunting as well as catspecific body language. it is a solitary hunter but a social species. it can hear sounds too faint or too high in frequency for human ears such as those made by mice and other small mammals. it is a predator that is most active at dawn and dusk. it secretes and perceives pheromones.female domestic cats can have kittens from spring to late autumn with litter sizes often ranging from two to five kittens. domestic cats are bred and shown at events as registered pedigreed cats a hobby known as cat fancy. failure to control breeding of pet cats by spaying and neutering as well as abandonment of pets resulted in large numbers of feral cats worldwide contributing to the extinction of entire bird mammal and reptile species and evoking population control.
the origin of the english word cat old english catt is thought to be the late latin word cattus which was first used at the beginning of the th century. it was suggested that the word cattus is derived from an egyptian precursor of coptic  tomcat or its feminine form suffixed with t. the late latin word is also thought to be derived from afroasiatic languages. the nubian word kaddska wildcat and nobiin kads are possible sources or cognates. the nubian word may be a loan from arabic. it is equally likely that the forms might derive from an ancient germanic word imported into latin and thence to greek and to syriac and arabic. the word may be derived from germanic and northern european languages and ultimately be borrowed from uralic cf. northern sami gfi female stoat and hungarian hlgy stoat from protouralic  female of a furred animal.
the english puss extended as pussy and pussycat is attested from the th century and may have been introduced from dutch poes or from low german puuskatte related to swedish kattepus or norwegian pus pusekatt. similar forms exist in lithuanian pui and irish puisn or puiscn. the etymology of this word is unknown but it may have simply arisen from a sound used to attract a cat.
a male cat is called a tom or tomcat or a gib if neutered an unspayed female is called a queen especially in a catbreeding context. a juvenile cat is referred to as a kitten. in early modern english the word kitten was interchangeable with the nowobsolete word catling. a group of cats can be referred to as a clowder or a glaring